Single-Static Assignment Form and PHI
-------------------------------------

We'll take a look at the same very simple ``max`` function, as in the previous
section.

.. literalinclude:: listings/simple_if_max.cpp
    :language: c++

Translated to LLVM IR:

.. literalinclude:: listings/simple_if_max_cleaned.ll
    :language: llvm

We can see that the function allocates space on the stack with ``alloca``
[#allocalink]_, where the bigger value is stored. In one branch ``%a`` is
stored, while in the other branch ``%b`` is stored to the stack allocated
memory. However, we want to avoid using memory load/store operation and use
registers instead, whenever possible. So we would like to write something like
this:

.. code-block:: llvm

    define i32 @max(i32 %a, i32 %b) {
    entry:
      %0 = icmp sgt i32 %a, %b
      br i1 %0, label %btrue, label %bfalse

    btrue:                                      
      %retval = %a
      br label %end

    bfalse:                                     
      %retval = %b
      br label %end

    end:
      ret i32 %retval
    }

This is not valid LLVM IR, because it violates the static single assignment
form (SSA, [#wikissa]_) of the LLVM IR. SSA form requires that every variable
is assigned only exactly once. SSA form enables and simplifies a vast number of
compiler optimizations, and is the de-facto standard for intermediate
representations in compilers of imperative programming languages.

Now how would one implement the above code in proper SSA form LLVM IR? The
answer is the magic ``phi`` instruction. The ``phi`` instruction is named after
the φ function used in the theory of SSA. This functions magically chooses the
right value, depending on the control flow. In LLVM you have to manually
specify the name of the value and the previous basic block.

.. code-block:: llvm

    end:
      %retval = phi i32 [%a, %btrue], [%b, %bfalse]

Here we instruct the ``phi`` instruction to choose ``%a`` if the previous basic
block was ``%btrue``. If the previous basic block was ``%bfalse``, then ``%b``
will be used. The value is then assigned to a new variable ``%retval``. Here
you can see the full code listing:

.. literalinclude:: listings/simple_if_max_phi.ll
    :language: llvm


PHI in the Back End
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's have a look how the ``@max`` function now maps to actual machine code.
We'll have a look what kind of assembly code is generated by the compiler back
end. In this case we'll look at the code generated for x86 64-bit, compiled
with different optimization levels. We'll start with a non-optimizing backend
(``llc -O0 -filetype=asm``). We will get something like this assembly:

.. code-block:: asm

    max:                                    # @max
    # %bb.0:                                # %entry
        cmpl    %esi, %edi                  # %edi = %a, %esi = %b
        jle     .LBB0_2
    # %bb.1:                                # %btrue
        movl    %edi, -4(%rsp)              # mov src, dst
        jmp     .LBB0_3
    .LBB0_2:                                # %bfalse
        movl    %esi, -4(%rsp)              # mov src, dst
        jmp     .LBB0_3
    .LBB0_3:                                # %end
        movl    -4(%rsp), %eax              # return value in eax
        retq


The parameters ``%a`` and ``%b`` are passed in ``%edi`` and ``%esi``
respectively. We can see that the compiler back end generated code that uses
the stack to store the bigger value. So the code generated by the compiler back
end is not what we had in mind, when we wrote the LLVM IR. The reason for this
is that the compiler back end needs to implement the ``phi`` instruction with
real machine instructions. Usually that is done by assigning to one register or
storing to one common stack memory location. Usually the compiler back end will
use the stack for implementing the ``phi`` instruction. However, if we use a
little more optimization in the back end (i.e., ``llc -O1``), we can get a more
optimized version:

.. code-block:: asm

    max:                                    # @max
    # %bb.0:                                # %entry
        cmpl    %esi, %edi
        jg      .LBB0_2
    # %bb.1:                                # %bfalse
        movl    %esi, %edi
    .LBB0_2:                                # %end
        movl    %edi, %eax
        retq


Here the ``phi`` function is implemented by using the ``%edi`` register. In one
branch ``%edi`` already contains the desired value, so nothing happens. In the
other branch ``%esi`` is copied to ``%edi``. At the ``%end`` basic block,
``%edi`` contains the desired value from both branches. This is more like what
we had in mind. We can see that optimization is something that needs to be
applied through the whole compilation pipeline.


.. [#wikissa] `Wikipedia: Static single assignment form <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single_assignment_form>`__
.. [#allocalink] `LangRef: alloca <http://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#alloca-instruction>`__
.. [#philink] `LangRef: phi <http://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#phi-instruction>`__
